[soft piano music]
- I didn't know
it would last this long.
I had no idea.
- It's been so freeing
to create this world
and to live in this world
for this long.
*
- It's just a really special
bond that we have.
- We didn't have nearly
as large of a cast back then,
so it was a much smaller
ragtag group of people
who were there all the time.
- It was just us in the woods
as a family just kicking butt.
- I wasn't really 100% sure
how the general public
would take it.
- We never dreamed
that there would be
this kind of response
to this show.
[cheers and applause]
- 21 million people a week
watching your show
at the height of it.
- I thought that I would
be fine, prepared.
I fucking was not.
- Because it was like
jumping on a moving train.
- You will not be able to talk
about the history of television
without talking about
AMC's "The Walking Dead."
- I love that I get to be
a part of something
that meant so much to people.
- For all the skepticism
about whether a zombie show
could work on TV,
it kind of blew everyone away
as to what could be done
with the genre.
It felt very special
from the beginning.
- How do you bring
a story like this
to a conclusion
that is worth the legacy
of what this show is?
- What do we want
to give people?
Why have they been
with us this long?
And how do we honor that?
- The goal from the beginning
was, make it as big
and make it as impressive
as we possibly can.
- It's just gonna be
crazy, man.
- Have I thought about the end?
Yeah.
Kind of breaks my heart,
to be honest.
- We're gonna see
a bit of the OG
"Walking Dead" return.
- Get ready.
It's gonna be bloody.
[laughs]
*
- So we ready to roll?
- I'll have you
introduce yourself,
uh, and kind of tell me
what your job is on the show.
- Hi. I'm Tom Luse.
I'm an executive producer
on "The Walking Dead"
and part of the producing team.
- I'm Denise Huth,
and I'm one
of the executive producers
on "The Walking Dead."
- My name is Scott Gimple.
I am the chief content officer
of "The Walking Dead" universe.
- My name is Angela Kang,
and I am the showrunner
of "The Walking Dead."
- My name is
Gregory Paul Nicotero,
March 15, 1963,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
- Yeah, I've been here
basically longer than anybody.
[laughing]
So I know it all.
[dramatic music]
- For any of us that started
on the show early enough,
I don't know that there were
very many people who were like,
"This could totally become
a franchise."
We were just like,
"Well, this is the show,
"and we're gonna make
the best version of this show
that we can for as long
as we're allowed to."
- "The Walking Dead"
has always been
the greatest summer camp
on Earth.
That aspect of it,
of us being in Senoia,
this lovely little town,
just doing our thing
away from the world,
there was a purity to that.
- The expectations
at the beginning
were not that we were gonna
become what we have become.
- It's been interesting.
I've done a lot
of zombie movies.
I've never done
a zombie school.
So I thought that it was
really good for me
to be able to go through
and kind of handpick
the people
that I really liked.
For quite a while,
we had talked
about the idea of doing
some sort of genre zombie show.
And then, of course,
"The Walking Dead"
comes along,
the comic book.
- We first got the rights
to the comic book
way back in 2005
and spent five years
trying to get it made.
And so AMC finally said yes,
and we were able to shoot
that first season in 2010.
- Norman Reedus, take one.
- There was so much care
and thought
that went into that
original casting.
You know,
I remember being there
for when Andy came
and did a screen test
and Bernthal and Sarah,
and it just felt very special
from the beginning.
It felt like this little
kernel of something
that could be amazing
and we wanted to protect.
- I won't do it.
We can't just leave.
- Carol, the group is split.
We're scattered and weak.
- What if she comes back
and we're not here?
Could happen.
- If Sophia found her way back
and we were gone,
that would be awful.
- I came to be
a part of the show
having done a film
called "The Mist."
And I think it was
three years later
and totally unexpected.
Got a phone call
they had a role for me
in "The Walking Dead."
I had no idea
what "The Walking Dead" was.
I remember
going to the comic store
to find out what it was,
and I opened the book,
just some random page.
And it was--
[growls]
And I was like, "Oh, dear.
Oh, dear. Well, I don't know.
What am I getting myself into?"
- I read the pilot.
It seemed super honest.
I didn't really read zombies
into the pilot.
I saw a man
trying to find his family
and being confused
and worried.
And it really struck with me.
*
- Dad!
Getting cast on the show was
pretty fast
and really exciting.
They originally had said,
"We're gonna bring you out
for a screen test
with Steven Yeun."
And then, like, a day later,
they said,
"Actually, we're gonna
fly you to Georgia
and you're gonna
start filming."
- It was just sort of
the perfect work atmosphere.
And everybody was very excited
'cause we were going
into an unknown.
There wasn't a show
quite like "The Walking Dead."
Nobody knew what was
going to become of it.
We were aware that this
would be a six-episode pilot.
We didn't know if we would have
another season.
- There was no expectation
of a season two.
So it sort of felt like,
do whatever we gotta do
and just get through
those six episodes.
- Our production budget
and our crew size was modest.
We had very few resources
to make the show.
What we had were
an amazingly dedicated team
behind and in front
of the camera.
- A variety
of different bloods.
This is, like,
our zombie blood.
We have dark zombie blood,
dressing blood,
pumping blood,
dark pumping blood,
mouth blood,
zombie mouth blood.
I think six different kinds
of blood?
Something like that, yeah.
- We shot
on 16 millimeter film.
We did almost all
of our effects in camera
and kind of embraced
an old-school horror mentality
that got me very excited
about new ways of filmmaking.
- Ooh. There we go.
You know, it felt like
a little feature,
to be honest.
It felt like a movie.
Who are these people?
It was the first thing
I'd done
with a group of actors
that were 100% behind you.
Everybody was in it to win it,
and it was a family.
- That whole ensemble feel
was really laid down
really nicely by Andy Lincoln.
- He was like a superb leader.
- I want to make this
as real, as harrowing,
as raw, and as exciting
as I can possibly do.
I'm gonna give it my all.
- Everybody really bonded
like that.
You know, we were
away from Hollywood,
away from our families.
We were out here in the woods.
It was just kind of
our little bubble.
- It's sort of the lure
of the show,
how the cast
in those first few seasons--
you know, they never
went to their trailers.
They never weren't on set.
It's just they came to set
in the mornings,
and that's where they were.
- This is a segment
called Hugs for Free.
- No, no, no.
- It felt very--almost
student-film-ish in a way,
but we had a better
budget than that.
[all exclaim]
I mean, not great, but better.
- Episode two in the can.
- Yay!
- A lot of people
initially were like,
"Oh, yeah, I don't really--
"it's a zombie show.
It's not really my thing."
And then word of mouth
came out,
and people would say,
"It's not a zombie show.
"There are zombies in it,
"but that's not
what it's about.
This is a story
about survival.
about people banding together
to fight against
a greater common enemy.
And that's how we fell
in love with Daryl,
you fell in love with Carol,
you fell in love with Maggie,
you fell in love with Rick.
And that's when the show began
to gain a lot of momentum.
It was pretty fascinating
what we were able to do.
The fact that we were changing
the rules of television
and changing the rules
of genre storytelling.
I really do feel that
"Walking Dead's" footprint
has been emulated
in so many shows since then,
because up to that point,
we'd never seen
anything like it on TV.
- I remember
early on thinking,
"This is
absolutely phenomenal."
Suddenly, people know who I am.
And you realize
this is kind of a big deal.
- There was definitely
a moment
when it felt a bit overwhelming
that it had gotten so popular,
and I remember
Steven and I talking about it
and kind of trying to find
a way to process that--
That you were
that interesting to people.
- You know, the thing
about the fandom
and the popularity of the show,
we didn't really feel it
till, like, season three
or four
because we were out here.
We were so deep in it
that we didn't
really see the outside world.
- It's pretty incredible
to be a part
of something that becomes
a worldwide phenomenon.
I feel so fortunate
to have been
a part of putting
something together
that resonated
as much as this did.
[cheers and applause]
- It wasn't like
we went to those fan events
and there was, like, 10 people,
and then 100 people,
and 1,000 people.
We just went to them
and there was 10,000 people,
like, right off the bat.
And it was like that
everywhere.
There were drones
being flown around here,
people trying to spy.
There were people
hiding in the woods.
- I've never had an experience
where I've gone somewhere
or somebody's noticed
or said anything
when it hasn't been
an emotional connection
with a fan.
And--and I just thought, "Yeah,
because that's how we feel
when we make it."
[dramatic music]
*
- The thing that's interesting
right now
in terms of making people
realize is,
is that, you know,
we're officially in prep
for the last episode.
It's not just an episode.
- Walkers, everybody--
stunt walkers,
everybody's gotta be
full performance every time.
No sleeping walkers.
Every time, it's gotta be
spot on, right?
- So am I looking into--
- You look at me.
- Look at you? Great.
- Well,
they're also prescription.
[laughs]
- Are they?
- I can--I'll take them off
at some point.
How about that?
- So how much of me
can you see?
Waist up?
- My white socks.
- So you can see my socks?
- White socks.
- Hold on. Let's cut.
- Yeah.
- You should sit over there,
because that way,
if I say something bad,
I can see Brandy
over your shoulder going--
- Yeah, I feel like
I should be--
I should be here, though.
I should be like,
"I can't believe it's over."
[dramatic music]
- My name is Ross Marquand,
and I play Aaron.
- Hi, I'm Seth Gilliam,
and I play Father Gabriel.
- I'm Josh McDermitt.
I play Eugene.
- Hi. I'm Khary Payton.
I play King Ezekiel.
- My name is Cailey Fleming,
and I play Judith Grimes.
- Hi. I'm Lauren Ridloff.
I play Connie
on "The Walking Dead."
*
- The experience
getting cast on the show,
for me, was life-changing.
- It was pretty surreal.
- Fans came up to me and said,
"You should be Negan."
It was maybe
the most exhilarating work
I think I'd ever done
up to that point.
- I was a bit intimidated
coming here
with an ensemble cast
who had been doing this
and had made such a name
for themselves.
- Very intimidating coming
into a show that you love.
You don't want to be the one
who screws it up.
- It was kind of like,
"Here's the script, dude.
Don't screw this up," you know?
- But we'd all tell you
the same thing.
We were welcomed right away.
- You know, Andy gave me
some shit initially.
But it was very good-natured.
- [giggling]
My first day on set,
I was just blown away
about how kind they were.
They were so welcoming
and accepting of me.
- Hi.
- I'm Andy. What's your name?
- Addie.
- Andy Lincoln came
on a day off just to greet us.
Who's done that for me
before in my career?
Nobody.
- Before I even got on a plane
to fly out to Georgia,
Steven Yeun was emailing me
saying, "Hey, here's my number.
"Let's hang out, let's"--
you know,
"Welcome to the show.
I'm excited
to be working with you."
That really set the tone.
- When you're coming
into such a crazy environment,
it's such a nice thing to do.
I want to do that
for people in my career.
[indistinct chatter]
*
- This was
a really tricky year.
It's been
a really tricky two years
for the entire world.
And our writers were already
well at work
in the room in January,
February, March of 2020.
- Our usual schedule, we start
the writers room in January.
And then, you know, we work
for a certain number of weeks,
and then we pitch AMC the--
our plans for the season,
and then we start writing,
and then we start shooting
somewhere around the end
of April, beginning of May.
- We had actually
just had a pitch,
what we thought was gonna be
a traditional season 11
of 16 episodes.
And then the pandemic hit.
- At that time,
we were already in pre-prep.
Like, sets were being built,
department heads were
getting ready to travel,
like, all of that
kind of stuff.
It became apparent
that this wasn't,
like, gonna be
a four-week thing,
where we pause and then we got
back up and running.
We were just starting
to understand
it was going to be
very hard to produce
the episodes that we
initially had planned
for the start of season 11.
But we were
one of the early shows
that started producing again.
Really, not very many people
were able
to get up and running
very quickly in 2020
because there were
all these health protocols
that had to be figured out.
It was
this huge learning curve.
- I got you.
- Thank you so much.
*
- I honestly thought
this show was gonna
keep going for a while.
- One,
I think more than anything,
it was a shock.
- I kind of had
a wave of panic.
I was like, "Wait, wait, wait,
"I'm never going back there
again?
What are you talking about?"
I don't know.
It's just--it's surreal.
I haven't really accepted
that it's over,
I don't think, to be honest.
- And then we got
this phone call saying,
"Hey, so we're gonna do
24 episodes."
And of course,
first thing I thought about is,
"Holy shit, like, shooting
16 episodes almost kills us.
How are we gonna
shoot 24 episodes?"
I mean, this is not
a courtroom drama.
This show is hardcore.
- It's like every episode,
we approach it
like it's its own
little indie movie.
I think for everybody,
just the idea
of how do we produce this
in the time that we have
with the restrictions
that we have?
- How do you bring
a story like this
to a conclusion
that is worth the legacy
of what this show is?
- This is
a very widespread story
with literally dozens
of well-known characters
that we all have to--
you have to pay off.
And that is--
that's a very difficult,
very difficult thing to do.
- People are getting
used to it.
- What I'll say is that, like,
I know that every person
in this room
was like, "Oh, shit,
we have to end the series.
Like, let us not fuck this up."
- Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Angela Kang and the writers
really had to,
you know, drop whole things
that they had been working on
to shift gears
to do more episodes
to get us into the 24 episodes
of season 11.
Oh, and by the way,
you also have to wrap up
the whole show.
*
- This is the end
of the series,
so we have to, like--
you've gotta raise
those stakes in a way
that, like, elevates it
to the point
where these are the rides
we're gonna take you on.
- It's like a story
of, like, the gut, the heart.
You're dealing with, like,
almost, like, the bureaucracy
and the institution itself
as being the enemy
of human progress
and, like, how people
with good intentions
can still build something evil.
- I don't think
the Commonwealth thinks
they're evil,
given what's happened
all around them.
- In all societies where
there's, like, a figurehead
and they have all the power,
ultimately that power
will corrupt.
- So how do you still
ground that down
in the visceral sort of thing
that makes it
"The Walking Dead"?
- We know that there's
still a contingent
of our people in Commonwealth
that are in imminent danger.
- Well, the alternative is,
you go out into the wasteland
and you eat worms.
The alternative
is literally hell.
- Yeah.
- It's teeing up what becomes
a do-or-die kind of situation.
[soft music]
*
- There's a big statement
being made this season.
It's not really
what we're used to.
It's something
we've fallen on.
And then the writers themselves
are telling a story
of equality and social justice.
- I feel like
through the apocalypse,
we rediscover what is
really important to us.
And then we have
to reenter society.
And that is the Commonwealth.
And we face the threat
of losing ourselves once again.
So the battle is really about
[soft dramatic music]
- You've fallen on hard times.
And that is where
the Commonwealth
is more than willing to help.
If you remain, we can provide
labor and materials
to help you build back
all you've lost.
However,
if any are interested,
I do have another,
potentially more interesting
choice to offer.
*
- This whole season
feels like an escalation
across the board.
Now we're at a place where
we have multiple communities.
And we introduced
Commonwealth this year,
which is by far
the most advanced community
we've ever seen
in the history of the show.
You know, it's a community
of 50,000 people.
It's the closest thing
to what the world
used to look like
that we've ever seen.
And that was a huge undertaking
for the production crew.
- My name's Roger Scruggs.
I'm the construction
coordinator.
- Mike Sullivan,
and I'm the scenic charge.
- I'm Gia Grosso.
I'm the set decorator.
- I'm Vera Chow.
I'm the costume designer
of this season
of "The Walking Dead."
- It's been huge.
We've had big builds
pretty much every episode
this year.
It's been really ambitious.
Everything that's in there
in the square,
the Commonwealth square,
we built this year.
- They'll design the set.
They'll come to me and say,
"This is the kind of look
that I'd like."
And then we just
have to run with it.
The first big set that we did
was the Commonwealth.
We had no idea how large
it was going to be.
- The Commonwealth is
the biggest community
that they've been in
in the show,
and though it has a really
dark underbelly to it,
it's a community that--
that is successful.
This place,
compared to any other place
they've been,
is so shiny and nice and safe
that the place in and of itself
made our characters
into aliens.
- You kind of walk into it
and you're like, what is this?
Yeah, people in the outfits
walking around
eating cotton candy and stuff,
which is definitely different
than what we're used to.
You're like, where are we?
You're like, are we being
punked, like, you know?
And I think it plays on my face
in all the scenes there.
- What I do in my department,
my crew, is,
we handle all the set dressing.
For instance, this sofa
would be in our realm.
*
We had a great time
doing the Commonwealth town
because it's a mix
of found things.
And the little bit
that they do manufacture,
paper goods and you see a lot
of fabrics,
it was really fun
to make the shops
using all of those elements.
There's a lot of weird shit
in those shops.
[laughs]
- We've gone
from "The Walking Dead"
back to the living people.
It's kind of like
they're in a community
where they're not out
in the wild all the time.
They have running water.
They clean their hands
every day.
- I was aware
of the introduction
of the Commonwealth,
like, brand-new villains.
So it was a chance
to really change things up
and elevate it.
So we started thinking
about what kind of technology
would actually exist
in the Commonwealth.
And there's, like, no rules
in terms of what decade
we're in.
It's not
our actual present day.
So how has fashion evolved?
How has clothing
and sewing evolved
in this little town
of 50,000 people?
It's entirely up to me.
So that was fun.
- It's been
such a massive transition.
And there's not been
a slow progression in that.
We really shove our characters
into quite drastic changes
this season.
- I think our group is
too smart to be fooled by it,
to be honest.
And so we're kind of
reluctantly pulled into it
because we want safety
for our kids.
We want them to have
a better life.
And then it sort of
unravels around us.
- There's a direct clash,
I think,
for people on the outside
and people on the inside.
And there's an unrest inside
the Commonwealth as well,
and all of that is building up.
- The leader is
kind of a dictator,
and she's lying to everybody.
And they're just now opening
their eyes to it, I guess.
- What's exciting is,
Mercer has finally come around
and was able to rescue Eugene.
And now we're gonna see
what comes of that.
- After having had Hershel
kidnapped by Pamela,
[indistinct chatter]
- The scale of what
we're trying to accomplish
for this finale
and building up to the finale
is remarkable.
And I think
the scale of everything
is going to be a bit bigger,
a bit bolder,
and a bit more surprising.
- All right,
here we go, team.
Ready?
All right,
let's see what happens.
- We owe it to our fans
and the legacy of this show
to have a--lack of a better way
to say it,
a thrilling conclusion
to "The Walking Dead."
And we're gonna do that.
- Mark.
- I've never been on a show
that has this many
enormous sets.
And just trying
to get sets done
with the time frame
of a episodic TV show,
the challenge is
what I really like.
[dramatic music]
- When I read a script,
I do get really excited
when there is
maybe a new scenario
we haven't done before.
I'd say one of the first ones
that interested me
was our subway tunnels.
To create
an apocalyptic subway tunnel
was really a challenge
that we all really welcomed.
We just knew it was
going to be so fantastic.
- One of the big highlights
this season,
they built a 50,000-gallon
water tank,
and we filmed in it,
and it was the flooded basement
of Aaron's house.
We have--Judith and Gracie
are trapped down there
being attacked by walkers
who are in the water.
Aaron's jumping in
and smashing their heads in
with his mace hand.
And it's just--it is wild
to shoot in those conditions.
I'd never been able to do
anything like that.
- Thank you.
- We've had quite a few
sequences like that this year,
and they've kind of, you know,
taken up the scale of things
just a bit, those writers have.
- Episode nine,
we had the hwacha,
which just fires
rocket arrows out
as, like, a ballistic missile.
And they're firing into a herd,
and they're exploding
and blowing up,
and the rockets hit the walker,
shooting out sparks,
and then they explode
into a million pieces.
And there were
so many elements
we had to come up with.
- I built a couple prototypes.
Effects built
the working model,
because mine would have caught
on fire.
[phone vibrating]
- Excuse me.
I have to take this. Sorry.
Hello?
Everybody is at the top
of their game
and experts in their field
in each and every department.
I'm talking greens.
I'm talking art department,
crafty.
And sometimes when I don't
necessarily have to be on set,
I'll come on set
just to watch them
because it's so impressive.
- Just tell me your name
and what you do on the show.
- Taylor Knight.
I'm the hair department head.
- Brad Carey,
and I'm the key greens person.
- Geoffrey January.
First assistant director.
- I'm Jody Winslette.
I'm the transpo captain.
- Bryan Carey.
I'm the greens foreman.
- Vincent Gideon.
I am the key hair department
for "The Walking Dead."
[intense music]
*
- It's been a challenging
season, without a doubt.
But the only way
that it has survived
is because the passion
of the crew and the cast.
- A couple more times.
- Is that good?
- I need to see four more tests
before I'm comfortable with it.
- Shooting "The Walking Dead"
is like playing chess.
It's a very complicated show
to make.
We have visual effects
and special effects and stunts.
- [screaming]
- The glamour
of "The Walking Dead"?
There is no glamour
of "The Walking Dead"
while you're shooting
"The Walking Dead," you know?
It's like go, go, go!
Oh, it's hot?
Well, yeah, it's hot.
Oh, there are mosquitoes?
There are ticks?
Yeah, there are mosquitoes
and ticks.
- Bug spray on the tracks.
- And honestly, when I'm away,
I feel guilty
because I know that my crew
is out here busting their ass.
And I want to be out here,
you know,
feeling it with them.
The truth is,
we make magic in eight days.
And if you do it
with people you love,
it's actually worth it.
[dramatic music]
*
- This show makes you
uncomfortable.
But I think it helps for what
you guys see on the screen.
You feel
that uncomfortableness,
and that plays
because we're in
the middle of an apocalypse.
Those of us that have been here
longer than a year are insane.
- I've been in awe
of the people
that I've collaborated with
over the last 12 years
of making something
that's been amazing.
And we continue
that dedication
and that passion all the way
through to the last ring.
- We are gonna work
our asses off until then,
and then we're gonna have
a lot of tequila.
[laughs]
[dramatic music]
- Anything that happens
from the moment we shoot it,
we'll take in 40, 50, 60 hours
worth of material sometimes.
Once we take that footage in,
our assistant editors digitize
that footage for the editors,
put it into the machines,
kind of put it into order,
and get it ready
to be worked on.
- I'm Megan.
I'm the VFX coordinator.
- I'm Mike, the VFX editor.
- I'm Alan Cody,
and I'm the editor.
- I am Ryan DeGard.
I am the post producer.
- There's some fun stuff
in post.
And I think a lot of times,
people think,
like, "Oh, like,
it's done shooting."
Like, you must all
be on a break."
And I'm like, "No,
production is on a break."
[walkers snarling]
There's an entire
post-production process
that's happening
that goes on for months
and months and months.
- I think that's
one of the misconceptions
of, you know--just in general
with television and movies.
It's like,
as soon as you've shot it,
why isn't it ready
for us to watch it?
So it's like, you have to go
through these processes,
and they take a lot of time.
And the post process
consists of editing,
sound, visual effects, mixing.
And we kind of put
that whole thing together
in the post process and,
you know, condense that down
into something that we put
out to the public.
- I'm Jamie.
I'm the VFX producer.
Our show has a lot of killing,
especially of zombies.
And each actor has kind of
their own, like, hero weapon.
And if we see that green end
when we're watching,
we know,
"Okay, we're gonna need
to extend the length of it."
And then we'll kind of take
that second half
that we're building
and be able to swing it
through the actor's head
and add the blood
and all of the fun stuff.
- So all of those things
happen.
There's an entire mix process.
And our post producer does
an incredible amount of work
with the people that do ADR
and loop group
and add
all the background noises.
- Let's do these three
right here,
and then we'll
move them in there.
- Get down!
- [grunting]
- As far as sound goes,
this show is,
you know,
built on sound, really.
I mean, there's just a lot
of layers to what we do.
- It is a zombie show.
We take a lot of pride
in the artistry
that goes into the zombies.
We work really hard
to think about the zombies.
- Here we go.
[all snarling]
- There's just
some incredible work
that they all do
that's on screen.
- The last music spot
on "The Walking Dead."
- I know!
- God, shed a tear,
and here we go.
- I love working
with our composers.
Bear and Sam are just--
they are the best.
They are so story-driven.
They really, like,
are thinking it through
in terms of, like,
what is the story
we're trying to tell?
- Coming out
of the previous episode,
it will have been emotional,
I think.
To some degree, we can just,
like, carry that over.
- I agree, but it's like--
I think what you're suggesting
is what I wanted,
which is to start that
more noticeably
the instant [...] passes out...
- Yeah.
- Right.
- so that that's all
part of the piece.
- We talk about every scene
and we talk about
the episode as a whole
and we talk about, like,
what are themes
that we're trying
to get across?
Like, what are the emotions
of this scene?
And once we have
that conversation,
they go off
and they play with it.
They imagine.
They come up with themes.
It really just adds
to the experience.
- Are we still
planning on recording
the main title theme
with the live orchestra
as well?
I would love to do that.
- I mean,
let me put it this way.
- That'd be rad.
- It doesn't need it.
It doesn't want it.
But we'll do it
because it will look awesome.
[laughter]
- This idea of having Bear
and Sam use a live orchestra
had been kind of percolating
for a while for me.
And I'd been kind of thinking
about it in the background.
It's a big moment
for the show.
And when you have
a live orchestra,
it's big, right?
It's epic.
So, like, the idea that Bear
and Sam are gonna deliver
this music in a way
that we've never experienced
really on this show,
it's exciting.
- Some of the stuff
they're composing
that hasn't aired yet,
it's just--it's epic.
It's amazing.
Like, I think people will
really, really enjoy
the soundscape
of these episodes.
[flute playing]
- Welcome.
This particular episode,
we wanted to send out the show
on an even bigger note.
So everybody on the show
is excited
to bring in the winds
and the brass
and just do something
even bigger than normal.
So just really want to say
thank you to them
for letting us
do this tonight.
And thank you all
for being here.
Okay, bows up. Bar two.
["The Walking Dead"
theme playing]
- It's truly, truly a process
that hundreds of people
from start to finish
are working on.
It's so fun to get to be
part of all of that.
But just the amount of work
that people put in
to, like, really craft
every episode
- I'm trying to get
your kit pretty much
in the same direction
of the lens.
So you're like--
- All right, here we go.
Let's try one.
Here we go.
Let's roll, please.
- The nature of the show
and being an actor
on this show,
you always sort of feel like
the axe is about to drop on you
at any second.
- Shoot yourself back
just a tiny bit.
By, like--
- Like that?
- Yeah, perfect.
Thank you.
- I always answer the phone
to Angela the same way,
which is, "Is it--am I dead?
Is it now?"
I don't even say hello.
- All right,
that's a series wrap
on Michael, guys.
[all cheering]
- You know, on our show,
we have wrap-outs
as people have
their final series wraps.
And the final episode
of somebody
who's been on the show
for a while is always
really emotional, you know.
And usually, in any given year,
you might have, like,
a handful of those.
- Maggie nods her head.
And Duncan closes his eyes.
And she gently slides her blade
up into the back of his skull.
End of act three.
- We have our traditions.
We always try to celebrate
when one of us, you know,
goes off into the world again.
- We love you.
- [chuckles]
- We all had a sense
that, you know,
time was very precious.
- I'm Michael Cudlitz.
all: I'm Michael Cudlitz.
- And we should invest
as much in each other
because you never knew when
you were gonna lose somebody.
- This is great.
- As time goes on,
you get used to people dying.
But we just find ways
to make it
ridiculously celebratory
and fun.
- Thank you.
- European.
- Yeah, he's European.
- It's special.
Take as many
of these traditions with us
as we can, I think.
[soft music]
- It's a beautiful way,
actually, to say goodbye
to somebody who's been a part
of the show for a long time.
*
- You know,
everybody comes here to die.
When I meet somebody,
that's what I say to them.
Everybody comes here to die.
And some people
would be, like, horrified.
But that's what
our show is about.
*
- The big departures,
it's always like,
everybody's, like, a little,
like, choked up,
and it's touching.
But this time,
we had to wrap the entire cast,
because for everybody,
this was their last episode.
- How are the cast and you
preparing for the end?
- [laughs]
Um...
taking a lot of photos,
I think.
It's going to be
a mammoth sea of emotion
when it happens.
It's just crazy. Yeah.
But we've done
something great here,
and we've got something
to be so proud of.
And...
dang, this has been--
it's one in a million.
*
- I went to the IMDb
and just scrolled
on and on and on and on,
and there is
almost 100 pages here
of cast and crew
over these seasons
that have come
through these doors
to help make this show
come to life.
It's amazing to me to think
that this is
what I'm a part of.
[clears throat]
And...
we're a part of something
pretty darn incredible.
And I'm grateful.
*
- I know the product
that we put on screen
is one thing,
and that's what connects
so much of the world
to "The Walking Dead,"
but for us,
it's these relationships
that we share.
- Pan over there. Over there.
[engine revving]
[laughs]
- It's been a huge,
massive part
of our everyday life.
And that will never
happen again, ever.
That's what I'll miss.
- I'm in denial.
I'll be really honest.
You know, I'll look at Norman,
and he'll be like,
"It's gonna get sad."
- It's very, um...
surreal to think
that it's all ending now.
- I've definitely had moments
where I'm like, "Oh, wow,
this is the last time
this and that is gonna happen."
- I'm nervous
about saying goodbye.
I'm not gonna lie.
*
- I think I'm just gonna make
an Irish exit.
- I haven't said goodbye yet,
and I don't plan to.
- I'll just dip out.
It'll be too hard.
- So I'm just gonna
kind of walk away,
and then I know
I'll see everybody again,
and we'll just
leave it at that.
- Personally, I'm trying
to get as many moments
individually with people
as I can.
I'm trying to not be fearful
about sharing
just how much I love them.
- I hope it's not goodbye.
[laughs]
These are my best friends.
- That's a series wrap
on Mr. JDM.
[cheers and applause]
That is a wrap on Khary.
Series wrap on Josh.
[cheers and applause]
Series wrap on Christian.
Mr. Norman Reedus, Daryl.
[cheers and applause]
Series wrap on Melissa.
- Love you guys a lot.
- It was truly an honor
being here with you.
- Thank you.
It's really been
one of the best experiences
of my life.
- The one thing we have is that
we were all in the trenches
together.
No one can ever take that
away from us.
- And I won't forget you.
I appreciate you.
- We could lose our friends,
people we love.
It's not about us anymore.
It's about a future.
- Do I want the fans
to be happy with the show?
Yeah, of course.
The fans and the cast
and the crew
and everybody else
has a real relationship
with the outside world
through the show.
You know,
the number of families
that have come to me,
thanked me
for playing the character,
how I play the character,
and...
Daryl's tough, so it's
helped me get through stuff.
You know, things like that
have meant the world to me.
- It just means so much to us
that people are able to have
that escape.
- There are fans
who tell our actors,
like, this show gave me
something to talk
to my dad about
or it allowed me
to come out to my family.
- I know for me,
I am eternally grateful
to have been a part of it.
That being said, there are
new things on the horizon.
- We loved being on the show.
We loved making the show.
It's been us
against the world down here.
But outside of here,
it's just one big happy family.
*